[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other night.
[Amit Varma]: I dreamed that I was lying in a hospital bed, with doctors and nurses all around me, tubes
[Amit Varma]: going into me, tubes coming out of me, and the beep beep beep sound of some kind of heartbeat
[Amit Varma]: machine, which indicated reassuringly that I was still alive.
[Amit Varma]: All my living relatives were gathered at my bedside.
[Amit Varma]: All my dead relatives were standing at the window, waiting for my soul to leave my body
[Amit Varma]: so I could join them in waiting for the souls of other living relatives to leave their bodies.
[Amit Varma]: I had no idea what had happened to me, but it seemed to be serious.
[Amit Varma]: Just then, a huge doctor in a long white coat walked up to me.
[Amit Varma]: How are you feeling? he asked.
[Amit Varma]: I'm feeling okay, I said.
[Amit Varma]: I feel like talking.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know why.
[Amit Varma]: Kind of strange, isn't it?
[Amit Varma]: Not strange at all, he said.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's what I would expect.
[Amit Varma]: After all, we have diagnosed you with a fatal disease.
[Amit Varma]: You have the disease of excessive verbosity.
[Amit Varma]: You talk too much.
[Amit Varma]: One day it will be the death of you.
[Amit Varma]: We must cure this.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my God, I said alarmed.
[Amit Varma]: This is shocking news.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to die from talking too much.
[Amit Varma]: Please help me.
[Amit Varma]: Please cure me.
[Amit Varma]: The doctor looked at me and said, That's the idea, to cure you.
[Amit Varma]: There is only one medicine for your deadly disease.
[Amit Varma]: Your verbosity can only be cured by peace of mind.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, peace of mind is the medicine.
[Amit Varma]: Then give it to me, I said.
[Amit Varma]: What are you waiting for?
[Amit Varma]: I would like a dose of peace of mind immediately.
[Amit Varma]: It's not so simple, the doctor said.
[Amit Varma]: You see, peace of mind is very expensive and you can't afford it.
[Amit Varma]: That is why you will have no peace of mind.
[Amit Varma]: You will one day die of verbosity.
[Amit Varma]: There is nothing to be done.
[Amit Varma]: Go record a podcast or something.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, we're going to talk about drug prices, specifically the tendency of
[Amit Varma]: the government to fix drug prices so that poor people can afford them.
[Amit Varma]: This tends to have some unsavory unseen effects.
[Amit Varma]: Are there ways around these unseen effects?
[Amit Varma]: To discuss this subject, I have with me as my guest on the show today, my good friend
[Amit Varma]: Pawan Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan is a fellow at the Takshashila Institution in Bengaluru and he's also a contributing
[Amit Varma]: writer at Pragati, the online magazine that I edit at thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan, welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Hi Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan, what we're talking about today, the scene and the unseen effects, is the government
[Amit Varma]: mandating, setting prices for certain key drugs, which the common people can't afford.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, India is a very poor country and people can't often afford expensive cancer
[Unknown]: treatment and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And what the government in its wisdom does to look after these people is it sets a price
[Amit Varma]: for these drugs at certain points.
[Amit Varma]: And the scene effect of that is that those of them who do buy, get the drug, get it at
[Amit Varma]: that particular price point.
[Amit Varma]: What are the unseen effects of that?
[Guest]: The biggest unseen effect is who is, I mean, we have to ask ourselves the question, who's
[Guest]: creating these drugs, who's doing innovation on this, and will they have the right incentives
[Guest]: to come out with better drugs in the future?
[Guest]: And I think if the government decides to set a price, then your reward for doing a better
[Guest]: drug is nothing, right, because now it's fixed at 20 rupees a pop and you come up with a
[Guest]: brand new drug, which is 10 times better.
[Amit Varma]: You still have to pay the same amount.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, for a new drug to come up, I've heard a figure of, say, a billion dollars,
[Amit Varma]: which goes into the research of each new drug.
[Amit Varma]: And what you're saying is that, and this is especially true for diseases, which might
[Amit Varma]: be specific or very important for India, and therefore need research directed here, that
[Amit Varma]: people simply won't spend the money because they'll say, look, if we can't get our money
[Amit Varma]: back, then it's a minus EV proposition.
[Guest]: It doesn't make sense.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So here there are many arguments that are thrown around.
[Guest]: The first is people say, look, whatever private investment has gone into this drug, it's come
[Guest]: on top of public investment.
[Guest]: This is especially true in the US, in the UK and elsewhere.
[Guest]: So the argument is, since there is a lot of public funding that has gone into this too,
[Guest]: maybe some of the intellectual property needs to be owned by the public and whoever the
[Guest]: public is.
[Guest]: And the problem here is that the way scientific research works, the way drug development works,
[Guest]: is that it always rests on a large body of open source scientific knowledge.
[Guest]: That is, I mean, this is the kind of, I mean, you might have a researcher who is studying
[Guest]: a fruit fly and how deleting one gene in that fruit fly might change its biology.
[Guest]: You will have all kinds of very, very esoteric niche types of research that take place.
[Guest]: And serendipity is a real thing in research.
[Guest]: So eventually enough connections are made such that the knowledge is enough for someone
[Guest]: to start doing serious drug development.
[Guest]: So this is always a publicly funded layer by and large, sometimes also through philanthropy.
[Guest]: On top of this, now if someone has a promising candidate against HIV, if it's a researcher
[Guest]: in a university, they might decide to patent it themselves.
[Guest]: Sometimes they might think, hey, this is interesting, but it's not good enough to patent, so they'll
[Guest]: just publish it.
[Guest]: And so then a private player might go and work more on that and see if that one variant
[Guest]: of this compound might be patentable.
[Guest]: And eventually things need to work after all this trialing is done.
[Guest]: Once they come up with some compound, it has to go through multiple phases of clinical
[Guest]: trials.
[Guest]: So the $1 billion is a lot of time and a lot of money by multiple sources.
[Guest]: So they have to recover this.
[Guest]: And the norm has been that the public investment will come and let the private investment reap
[Guest]: a reward on top of that.
[Guest]: So what happens in India where, you know, none of this happens.
[Guest]: If you look at India's research and development spending on drugs, probably if you take what
[Guest]: the Gates Foundation spends on dengue and malaria, you take a few other foundations,
[Guest]: the Wellcome Trust in the UK, they're probably spending the same amount or more.
[Guest]: So there is no public investment layer.
[Guest]: And then India is a poorer country.
[Guest]: Tropical diseases are a smaller drug market, and diabetes is a huge global market.
[Guest]: So the moment you have a small market, which is not very well off, the incentives for the
[Guest]: private sector to come in and develop drugs is also weaker.
[Guest]: So in this environment, if you then go and do price setting, you're killing everything
[Guest]: and everything becomes dead on arrival.
[Amit Varma]: But here's the paradox.
[Amit Varma]: At one level, the unseen effect of price setting as any price controls would be that there
[Amit Varma]: is a shortage because obviously the producer, which is a drug companies, don't have the
[Amit Varma]: incentives to do the research and development necessary to get the drug to market.
[Amit Varma]: But the paradox is that the reason for which those price settings were set in the first
[Amit Varma]: place, that we're a poor country and they can't afford the drugs, also means that because
[Amit Varma]: we are such a poor country, and there's, you know, not that much of a market for these
[Amit Varma]: kind of drugs here, that those incentives don't exist in any case for those drug companies
[Amit Varma]: to actually, do you think that's the case?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you think that the whole system would function better if those price controls weren't
[Amit Varma]: there to begin with?
[Guest]: Okay, so I won't use any principles here, but let's just see what's better for the Indian
[Guest]: public and what's not.
[Guest]: So supposing someone invents a new drug to combat blood pressure or diabetes, that's
[Guest]: a problem that affects people globally, and Indians suffer from it too.
[Guest]: So a company can probably make its margins in the US, in the UK, in rich countries, and
[Guest]: then the company themselves, I mean, they have an interest in offering the drug at a
[Guest]: lower cost in India, you know, because it's a big thing and the market's large.
[Guest]: The alternative is the Indian government can also look sideways on the patent, sort of
[Guest]: people abusing the patent rights, and say that, look, anyway, this drug is available,
[Guest]: anyway, they'll make their money outside, let's just make it cheap for Indians.
[Guest]: That's fair.
[Guest]: I mean, that will benefit the public.
[Guest]: The problem is diseases and disorders that are endemic to India that are explicitly problematic
[Guest]: for India.
[Guest]: Dengue is my biggest example.
[Guest]: HIV is also a global problem.
[Guest]: So what happens is nobody is going to solve these problems at all.
[Guest]: So either it has to come from public investment, but even their private sector has a role.
[Guest]: So we are then not able to solve that problem at all.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you suggest?
[Guest]: What's a way forward?
[Guest]: So there are three things actually we'll have to think about.
[Guest]: One, no matter what, public investment in research and development has to go up.
[Guest]: That's the base case.
[Guest]: Second, I think, because India is becoming a richer country, we are not nearly as poor
[Guest]: as we were 20-30 years ago.
[Guest]: So we can afford to pay more.
[Guest]: So where we are thinking about price setting, maybe the government can work out a deal and
[Guest]: try to subsidize the cost.
[Guest]: Let the government bear the remaining cost rather than just completely destroy the incentives
[Guest]: for the producer.
[Guest]: The third thing that India can do is not let patent holders run away with all their rights.
[Guest]: So let's take a few steps back here.
[Guest]: A patent is basically something where if you've come up with an invention, a patent gives
[Guest]: you monopoly over extracting value from that innovation for a certain period.
[Guest]: So you've invested a billion dollars, you've come up with this new drug, you need time
[Guest]: to recover your investment from this drug.
[Guest]: So you get 10 years, 20 years where you have a monopoly over manufacture of this drug.
[Guest]: After that, it becomes public domain.
[Guest]: So any generic company should be able to pick up that formula and then run with it.
[Amit Varma]: So the term generic is essentially something that was once under patent, but no longer
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: So anyone can make it.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So what is happening here is that patent holders want to extract value from their patent more
[Guest]: and more.
[Guest]: Who doesn't want more profits?
[Guest]: So they do something called evergreening.
[Guest]: So the idea is that for one patent to be superseded by a second patent, you need to show that
[Guest]: your second drug patent is significantly superior to the first one.
[Guest]: So what they do is sometimes the original drug formulation that is patented does not
[Guest]: have a salt along with the drug.
[Guest]: You know, it's one on usually something is a sulfate, hydrochloride, something like that.
[Guest]: And what they do is in the second drug, they file a patent again when the first one is
[Guest]: expiring and then they add a new salt over there, which makes the drug slightly more
[Guest]: soluble in water.
[Guest]: You know, it's just more available in the body.
[Guest]: So it'll work better.
[Guest]: You know, you take 50 mg of the first drug, you take 25 mg of the second drug, the effect
[Guest]: might be the same.
[Guest]: So the company will claim that the second drug is a superior product.
[Guest]: So give me another monopoly for another 10-20 years.
[Guest]: This is called evergreening.
[Guest]: And the Supreme Court of India has said that evergreening is fraudulent and that it won't
[Guest]: stand for it in a specific case.
[Guest]: So in this sense, sort of the Indian government has been more conservative and more strict
[Guest]: in sort of deciding what patent holders can get away with, far more conservative than
[Guest]: what the American courts have been.
[Guest]: And I think that's a good thing.
[Guest]: I mean, it's good to give patent holders the rights to exploit value from this, but, you
[Amit Varma]: know, enough's enough.
[Amit Varma]: Evergreening is basically a hack to just keep it going beyond the extended period.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's an illegal monopoly.
[Amit Varma]: So you've pointed out three different aspects of what the government could do.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a clarification on the first and a question on the second.
[Amit Varma]: The first was, you said there should be more public investment in medical research.
[Amit Varma]: Could that be specifically for local ailments like dengue, because after all, in other diseases
[Amit Varma]: like cancer or blood pressure or whatever, we can just free roll on the efforts of public
[Amit Varma]: spending elsewhere.
[Unknown]: We don't actually need to add to that.
[Amit Varma]: So this would be specifically targeted towards diseases relevant only to us, which are not
[Guest]: otherwise likely to see funding.
[Guest]: Yeah, diseases and disorders that affect Indians more than others.
[Guest]: So this could also include certain strains of cancer that are just more prevalent in,
[Guest]: you know, genes that are common in the Indian stock.
[Amit Varma]: Moral cancer.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And my question on the second one, where you talk about the government subsidizing, that's
[Amit Varma]: instead of setting the price of, say, a cancer drug at rupees 100 per pill, it can set the
[Amit Varma]: price at rupees 100 per pill, but subsidize the rest.
[Amit Varma]: So if it really costs 400, the government pays the remaining 300.
[Amit Varma]: But when this is not for generics, when this is for a patented drug that only a specific
[Amit Varma]: company is manufacturing, for example, then doesn't it incentivize that company to charge
[Amit Varma]: whatever the hell it wants, because the government is going to pay anyway.
[Guest]: So the government can still do interesting things, you know, even if, say, it's GlaxoSmithKline
[Guest]: or someone selling a drug.
[Guest]: Maybe the government can just buy it on the open market in a neighboring country.
[Guest]: So there the price has already been set.
[Guest]: So it's not like, I mean, any drug's price needs to be discovered in India for the first
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: It will already be operating in the market.
[Guest]: If the Indian government genuinely has a conundrum where, you know, they're trying to negotiate
[Guest]: on a drug which does not exist in the market, yes, what you say is genuine.
[Guest]: So now that they roughly know what the price is in different countries.
[Guest]: So I think there is enough basis for a negotiation.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, it just has to be a negotiation.
[Guest]: I can't think of a better way to solve this problem.
[Amit Varma]: And if I ask you to put on your economist hat for a moment and speculate about the downstream
[Amit Varma]: unseen effects of such a subsidy, what are the unwanted, unintended consequences that
[Guest]: it could lead to in turn?
[Guest]: The first is a moral hazard.
[Guest]: Something is subsidized, so it gets consumed more.
[Guest]: So a drug that costs 1000 rupees is now available for 10 rupees.
[Guest]: And so you abuse that drug because you don't, it doesn't pinch you.
[Guest]: The second is supposing the government decides, hey, this is, it's not going to subsidize
[Guest]: this drug for all Indians, but only for a few, you know, they might be poor or they
[Guest]: might be from a particular region, whatever reason.
[Guest]: People without Aadhaar cards.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And supposing it does so, then the moment you introduce two prices in the ecosystem,
[Guest]: then you will have arbitrage.
[Guest]: You will have people buying.
[Guest]: So you'll have a PDS for drugs, which already exists, right?
[Guest]: The reason it is not exploited too much is because generics are quite cheap to begin
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: Indian pharma, generic pharma companies are among the best in the world.
[Guest]: We have amazing synthetic chemists figure out how to create any drug you want at the
[Guest]: lowest cost.
[Guest]: You know, so we have that going, that's our strength, which is why making policy on this
[Guest]: becomes more complicated in the country.
[Amit Varma]: So broadly, you'd say that, look, the unseen effect of setting prices for drugs is the
[Amit Varma]: shortages and the lack of incentives for companies to invest further in R&D.
[Amit Varma]: So your three pronged solution, therefore, would be that a, there should be more public
[Amit Varma]: investment in India relevant diseases.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Two, if you have to set a price beyond which, you know, the Indian consumer can't buy and
[Amit Varma]: too many people will suffer, then you subsidize whatever there is on top of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you make sure that the manufacturer gets a fair market price, whatever that is.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't even know, in the absence of the market mechanism, what a fair market
[Unknown]: price would be.
[Amit Varma]: But you make sure that he's got incentive to keep selling it to you.
[Amit Varma]: And the third one is that you don't allow people to exploit patents by doing the kind
[Amit Varma]: of hackery that evergreening essentially represents.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, all of these are sort of speculative suggestions.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's just a very difficult area to make progress, isn't it?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And that's the thing.
[Guest]: No drug in dengue is fundamentally different from one drug for dengue, right?
[Guest]: So we can't imagine an India where we have an Indian medical solution for an Indian problem.
[Guest]: We've still not crossed that bridge in a big way.
[Guest]: I think we need a few powerful examples.
[Guest]: Probably they're on the way.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, there are talks of a dengue vaccine among some researchers.
[Guest]: Many of these things float around as ideas for about 10-20 years, lots of research happens,
[Guest]: eventually something hits the market.
[Guest]: So I think the time is right for a few drugs to, few medicines to start coming out of India
[Guest]: for India.
[Guest]: And I think once we see a few of them successful, you know, I think the constituency for more
[Guest]: reward policymaking on this will only grow.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan, thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: It's a pleasure talking to you and thanks for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So I got to finish telling you about the dream that I mentioned at the start of the show.
[Amit Varma]: I was lying on my bed.
[Amit Varma]: I had been diagnosed with terminal verbosity and my doctor had told me that only peace
[Amit Varma]: of mind could cure me and peace of mind was out of stock.
[Amit Varma]: What to do?
[Amit Varma]: Just as I was beginning to despair, the doctor said, there may be no peace of mind for you,
[Amit Varma]: but I have a find for you.
[Amit Varma]: There is another medicine that could help you recover deeper than the tender caresses
[Amit Varma]: of a lover.
[Amit Varma]: That medicine is called wisdom and understanding and your verbosity notwithstanding.
[Amit Varma]: This medicine is within reach, which is why I beseech you to go right now, somehow, anyhow,
[Amit Varma]: to seenunseen.in to listen to the finest podcast that has ever been.
[Amit Varma]: It is called the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Go now, rush.
[Amit Varma]: It will make you hush.
[Unknown]: Seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the seen and the unseen, check out another hit show from Indus
[Amit Varma]: Works Media Networks, Cyrus Says, which is hosted by my old colleague from MTV, Cyrus
[Amit Varma]: Brocha.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
[Unknown]: This is your captain speaking.
[Unknown]: Sorry to say, but there's been a slight delay due to the apocalypse having suddenly begun.
[Unknown]: As you can see, there's death, destruction and chaos taking place all around us.
[Unknown]: But don't you worry, food and drinks will be served shortly.
[Unknown]: And I would recommend checking out IVM Podcasts to get some of your favorite Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: We'll keep you going till this whole thing blows over.
[Unknown]: Thank you.